Update Starter Guide with v3 features (#30)
usebruno/bruno-docs: introduction/starter-guide.mdx

---
title: "Bruno Starter Guide"
---

> Bruno offers a fast, Git-friendly approach to API development that's fundamentally different from traditional API clients. This hands-on path walks you through **13 challenges**—from your first request to scripting, tests, the Collection Runner, docs, Git, OpenAPI import, and the CLI.

Reviewer: I think you can lose `import` after `OpenAPI`.

Small grammar edit. Change `scripting` to `scripts` to keep tense the same.

This might be good as a bulleted list with links to the relevant docs pages. Bulleted list is a little easier to consume and the links provide further references.

## Prerequisites

- Basic familiarity with HTTP and REST  

> - [Bruno installed](https://www.usebruno.com/downloads) (v3.0.0)

Reviewer: Maybe `v3+` instead of `v3.0.0` (or whatever min. version is required) so it stays relevant without needing to be updated as frequently

> - **Git** (optional, for the Git challenge)

Reviewer: Git's not optional since you want the user to clone the collection repo

## Getting Started

Import the **Bruno Starter Guide** collection:

> 1. Use **Fetch in Bruno** below, **or** clone the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/bruno-collections/bruno-starter-guide).

Reviewer: This step doesn't really explain _how_ to import.

I think a slight adjustment to the text can help:

You can either:
a. Click on the **Fetch in Bruno** button below to clone and import the sample collection into Bruno
b. Clone the repo [GitHub repo](https://github.com/bruno-collections/bruno-starter-guide), and import it manually into Bruno.

<div className="flex justify-center my-10">
  <a href="https://fetch.usebruno.com?url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fbruno-collections%2Fbruno-starter-guide.git" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">
    <img
      src="https://fetch.usebruno.com/button.svg"
      alt="Fetch in Bruno"
      style={{ width: '160px', height: '40px' }}
      width="160"
      height="40"
    />
  </a>

> </div>

Reviewer: This might be a good opportunity for a quick one-liner about the fetch in bruno button and a link to a docs page.

Reviewer: The Collection's folders have numbers but their names don't match this guide

- `01-Basics`
- `02-Environment and Collection`
- ...

The repo includes structured challenges, sample requests, per-challenge notes, and **solution** folders. Open the collection in Bruno and work at your own pace.

## Challenge path

> Complete the challenges in order; each builds on the previous ones.

Reviewer: I would put this as a note after Pre-reqs, so it doesn't get lost and people get stuck or have problems because they jumped around.

```suggestion
[!NOTE]
Complete the challenges in order; each builds on the previous ones.
```

---

## 1. Create your first request

### What you'll learn

> Navigate the UI, create a request, set method and URL, and send a successful call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An intro to the UI, how to create requests, set their method and URL, and how to send them.
```

### Instructions

> 1. Open Bruno (**Workspace Home** or your workspace).

Reviewer: The previous step had the user import a collection. But, it's not used or referenced here.

For a starter guide, I think we need to introduce the user to concepts they might not be familiar with like Workspaces and how they relate to things like collections and requests and environments.

> 2. Create a request (e.g. **+** on the tab bar, or **`···` → New Request** on a collection).

Reviewer: You do a nice job of teaching the user how to navigate the UI to accomplish this step. I would apply this strategy to the other steps as well. 

Visuals (screenshots, video, gif, ...) would be really useful here.

Reviewer: nit. Drop `e.g.`. This isn't an example, you're explaining how to do it.

3. Set method to **GET** and URL to `https://api.github.com/users/usebruno`.
4. Execute the request.

> You should see a **200** response with GitHub user JSON.

Reviewer: This line is redundant with the success criteria below. I would just delete this line.

### Success criteria

- Request is created and runs successfully  

> - Response status is **200**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New request created
- Request sends successfully with a **200** response status
```

---

## 2. Creating environments

### What you'll learn

> Create an environment, add variables, use `{{variable}}` in the URL, and switch environments from the dropdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How to create an environment, add variables, use `{{variable}}`'s in the URL, and how to change the active environment.
```

### Instructions

> 1. Open the **environment** control (top right as **No Environment**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the **environment** control (top right dropdown showing **No Environment** or the name of the current active environment(s)).
```

> 2. Click on **Create** in **Collections** section.

Reviewer: This step is unclear

3. Name it `echo-bruno` and add a variable:
   - **Key:** `base-url`  

>    - **Value:** `https://api.github.com/users/usebruno`

Reviewer: I think this needs a different name since this isn't going to echo bruno

4. Save, select **`echo-bruno`** in the environment dropdown.

> 5. Edit your request URL to `{{base-url}}` and run it again.

Reviewer: I suggest `create a new request` so that we can build off the last step where we learned that.

> You should still get **200** with the same payload as challenge 1.

Reviewer: redundant with success criteria

### Success criteria

> - Environment `echo-bruno` exists with `base-url`  

Reviewer: Probably want to add the environment is activated or its name shows in the environment selector/dropdown in the top right

- Request uses `{{base-url}}` and returns **200**

---

## 3. Send API requests with data

### What you'll learn

Use **POST**, send a **JSON** body, and read the echoed response.

### Instructions

1. Create a new request (method **POST**, URL `https://echo.usebruno.com`).
2. Open the **Body** tab → **JSON**.
3. Paste:

```json
{
  "title": "Bruno",
  "role": "Loved by developers. Built for developers."
}
```

4. Send the request.

The response body should echo what you sent.

### Success criteria

- POST with JSON body configured  

> - Response reflects the same JSON fields

Reviewer: I think this spends too much time on the basics. Since the pre-reqs require familiarity with REST. I would combine this with the previous step (e.g., add a couple of steps for changing from GET to POST and sending with a body)

---

> ## 4. Response handling and debugging

Reviewer: This doesn't really have anything to do with response handling

### What you'll learn

> Change the outgoing body from a **Pre-request** script with `req`, then inspect **Timeline** (and DevTools if needed) for debugging.

Reviewer: This reads like instructions rather than what I'll learn

### Instructions

<Info>
  The `req` object is available in the **Pre-request** script, not in the Test tab.
</Info>

> 1. Reuse the request from challenge 3 (POST to `https://echo.usebruno.com`).

Reviewer: Not the github api url?

> 2. Open **Script** → **Pre-request** and add:

Reviewer: give a brief explanation of what this script does

```js
const body = {
  name: "Bruno Starter Guide",
  "task id": "04",
};

req.setBody(body);
console.log(body);
```

3. Send the request.

Confirm the response matches `req.setBody`. Use the **Timeline** tab for request/response and network detail.

### Success criteria

- Status **200**  
- Response body matches the pre-request `req.setBody` payload  
- You can inspect details in **Timeline**

---

> ## 5. Authentication (Bearer token)

Reviewer: Link somewhere in this step to OAuth docs page as that's how a lot of users will get their token

### What you'll learn

> Attach **Bearer token** auth on a request and call a protected-style endpoint.

Reviewer: Again, this reads like steps not things I'll learn

### Instructions

1. Create a **GET** request to `https://httpbin.org/bearer`.

> 2. Open **Auth** → **Bearer Token**.

Reviewer: Explain need to switch the type of auth, e.g., use the dropdown selector to change the auth type (from inherit) to bearer token.

3. Set token to `password1234` (demo value for httpbin).
4. Send the request.

> The JSON response should show authenticated access and echo the token pattern httpbin returns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JSON response should show authenticated access and the token.
```

### Success criteria

- Bearer auth is configured  

> - Response indicates successful authenticated call

Reviewer: I would be a little more detailed here

---

> ## 6. Secret management

Reviewer: This is too close to Secrets Manager which is not what's being shown here.
Maybe Masking Secret Environment Variables

### What you'll learn

Mark an environment variable as **Secret**, reference it in JSON, and see masked values in the UI while the correct value is sent.

### Instructions

1. Open environments → select **`echo-bruno`**.
2. Add variable **`my_secret_key`** = `usebruno` and enable **Secret**.
3. Create **POST** to `https://echo.usebruno.com` (echo endpoint; your `echo-bruno` env is still selected for variables).
4. **Body** → **JSON**:

```json
{
  "secret": "{{my_secret_key}}"
}
```

5. Send the request.

The echoed JSON should include `"secret": "usebruno"` (matching the variable value).

### Success criteria

- Variable is marked **Secret**  
- Body uses `{{my_secret_key}}`  
- Response reflects the secret value was sent

---

> ## 7. Request scripting

Reviewer: This can be combined with #4

### What you'll learn

Use **Pre-request** to read `req` (URL, method) and **Post-response** to log response data.

### Instructions

1. Use a request with **`echo-bruno`** and URL `{{base-url}}` (GET is fine).
2. **Pre-request** script:

```javascript
const reqUrl = req.url;
const reqMethod = req.method;
console.log(reqUrl);
console.log(reqMethod);
```

3. **Post-response** script:

```js
console.log(res.body);
```

4. Send the request and open **DevTools** / console to see the logs.

### Success criteria

> - Pre-request runs without errors  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scripts execute successfully
```

- Post-response logs appear in the console  
- Logged URL/method match the request

---

## 8. Test assertions

### What you'll learn

> Use the **Assert** tab for quick checks and the **Tests** tab with Chai `expect` for scripted checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the **Assert** tab for quick checks and the **Tests** tab with Chai `expect` syntax for quick tests.
```

4. Start the run and watch requests execute in order.

Add more requests to the same collection to see multiple steps in one run.

### Success criteria

- Runner starts  
- Requests run in sequence  
- You can open each run line and inspect responses

<Warning>
  The Collection Runner runs **HTTP** requests only (not gRPC/WebSocket). See [Run a collection](/get-started/bruno-basics/run-a-collection).
</Warning>

---

## 10. API documentation

### What you'll learn

Add **Markdown** docs at collection, folder, and request level.

### Instructions

**Collection**

1. Select the collection → open **Settings** / overview.
2. Edit **Documentation** (pencil icon) and append:

```md
## Bruno Starter Guide Progress

1. Name: <your name>
2. Task: API documentation
3. Mood: 😎
```

**Folder** (optional)

1. Right-click a folder → **Settings** → **Docs**.
2. Add a short markdown description.

**Request**

1. Open a request → **Docs** tab → **Edit**.
2. Add purpose, parameters, or example notes in markdown.

### Success criteria

- Collection docs updated  
- At least one folder or request has docs (recommended for both)

---

## 11. Git collaboration

### What you'll learn

> Initialize Git on the collection folder, commit, add **GitHub** as `origin`, and push.

Reviewer: This is opposed to the beginning where we've cloned the collection

### Instructions

<Info>

>   **Bruno 3.0.0+:** core Git UI (initialize, diff, pull, clone, etc.) is available in the open-source edition. See [Git integration (GUI)](/git-integration/using-gui/intro).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **Bruno v3+:** core Git UI (initialize, diff, pull, clone, etc.) is available in the open-source edition. See [Git integration (GUI)](/git-integration/using-gui/intro).
```

I like the link to the docs page!
